---
layout: default
title: 'CSS'
author: Andrew Stelmach
date: 2016-02-08
categories: css
---

CSS Notes
------

I compiled these notes over a few months whilst studying CSS through (http://teamtreehouse.com)[http://teamtreehouse.com].  

I found them really useful when starting out so I have (laboriously!) copy/pasted and formatted it all here for the benefit of others.

**`font-family`**    
eg 
```
foo {
  font-family: Georgia, Times, serif;
}
```

The browser will cycle through these until it finds one it can use. Include this in all CSS for the body tag.

**`font-weight`**  
`bold` or `normal`. Headings are `bold` by default.

**`font-variant`**     
`small-caps` Makes all characters small uppercase, the capitals being bigger versions.

**`line-height`**   
to increase the space between lines. Use `ems` so it's relative to `font-size`.

**`text-align`**    
`left` `right` `center` `justify`

**`text-decoration`**  
`none` `underline` `line-through` 
```
a:hover {
  text-decoration: none
} 
```
- gets rid of the underline when cursor is over a link.

**`text-indent`**   
eg `1.5em` or negative value eg `-1em`. Indents the first line.

**`text-transform`**      
`uppercase` `lowercase` `capitalize`  
`capitalize` makes the first letter of each word uppercase.

**`white-space`**      
Controls how the browser handles white space characters and line breaks. Default value is
`normal` extended spaces are not rendered. Text renders normally with one space between words.
`nowrap` disables wordwrap.
`pre` text renders exactly how it's presented in the markup (the html), even indentations.
`pre-line` honours line breaks but not spaces.
`pre-wrap` like `pre` but still wraps the text.

**`text-shadow`**   
First value is the horizontal offset eg `1px`, second value is the vertical offset, 3rd value is optional and indicates amount of blur or blur radius applied to the drop-shadow (`3px` or `4px` looks good). 4th value is the colour, eg:  
```
foo {
  text-shadow: 1px, 1px, 3px, black;
}
```

**`word-wrap`**  
`break-word` useful for long links that are being wrapped. This inserts the wrap points after whole words. Makes it look neater.  
  
**`text-overflow`**    
`ellipsis` the existence of overflowing text (when it isn't visible) is indicated by an ellipsis ('...')
  
Lists
---
**`list-style-type`**  
`Square` square bullet points.

**`list-style-position`**  
`inside` puts the list decoration (eg the bullet point) inside the content flow (default is outside).

**`list-style-image`**  
`url('marker.png')` uses an image instead of a default bullet point or whatever. Can't control the position of the decoration with this though. Better to:
```
ul {
  list-style-type: none; 
}
```
...and then set a background image for each list item, positioned correctly eg:
  
```
ul {
  list-style-type: none;
}

ul li {
  background: url('marker.png') no-repeat 0 2px;
  Padding-left: 35px;
}
```

`no-repeat` stops the browser from repeating or tiling the image.  
The `0` is positioning it 0 pixels from the left and the `2px` positions it 2 pixels from the top.  
Padding is applied to the text's left side to stop it overlapping the image.

**`margin-bottom`**  
`1.2em`, for example, spaces items out - looks much better.
  
**`list-style`**  
`none` removes list item markers.

CSS Box Model
---

For any element, from the outside in:
* Margin
* Border
* Padding
* Content

**Block Element**: Forms a separate block that takes up the entire width available, based on the width of its parent element, with a new line before and after the element. Divs, headings, paragraphs and list elements are all block elements.

**Inline Element**: Only takes up as much width as it needs. They do not force any new lines and stay in line with the rest of the document. Examples: span tags, images, strong tags, and anchor elements.

**Background**: set the background colour of the box.
  
**Padding**: one value sets for all sides, two values: first is top and bottom, 2nd is left and right. Four starts at top and moves around clockwise for all sides.

**`border-width`** length or keyword values, -ive or %age values not allowed.  
Keywords: `thin`, `medium`, `thick`  
Can take 1, 2, or 4 values, like the padding property eg:  
```
foo {
  border-width: thin medium 20px 10px;
}
```
**`border-style`**  
`none` is the default. Again, can take 1 to 4 values.  
`dotted`  
`dashed`  
`solid`  

**`border-color`** takes any of the color value-types.
  
**`border-top-color`**
  
**`border-right-color`**
  
**`border-bottom-color`**
  
**`border-left-color`**
  
**`border`** values in order: _width_ _style_ _colour_ (no commas)

**`margin`** takes 1 to 4 values again.  
`auto` browser calculates the margins. Usually used to make margins equal.  
* -ive values applied to top and/or left: moves the element outside its containing element (usually a div).  
* -ive values applied to bottom and/or right: pulls its containing element.  

Width, Height & Overflow settings
---
Links by default are displayed 'inline'.  
  
```
foo {
  visibility: hidden; 
}
```
This makes the element invisible, but it still affects the layout as if it was there.  
`display: none;` hides an element as if it doesn't exist.
  
`visibility: visible;` default for all elements. Used to override any previous settings.
  
* **By default, a box's dimensions are dictated by the content it holds.**  

* The box's dimensions can be modified using width/height properties.  

**`width` & `height`: this defines the dimensions of the CONTENT area, NOT the entire box.**
    
**`height`** in % values: when doing this, its parent element must also be given a defined height (can be in %) and that parent's element must also be given a height etc etc - all the way up to the `<html>` element (all can be in %, strangely. The div's height will then change.
  
**`box-sizing: border-box;`** this property and value will force the browser to adjust the width & height of the padding and border sizes of the box to fit a pre-defined box size, instead of expanding the box eg:
```
foo {
  width: 500px;
  border: 10px solid #ffff;
  box-sizing: border-box;
}
```
**`-moz-box-sizing: border-box;`** this is the vendor prefix for firefox.  
**`min-width/min-height`** and **`max-width/max-height`** self-explanatory.  

**`overflow`**  
`visible` - the default value. No need to use this unless to override a value previously declared.  
`hidden` - hides or clips any content that extends outside the containing box. Sometimes useful if working with dynamic content and you're worried about overflowing text breaking your layout.  
`scroll` - provides vertical and horizontal scroll-bars! So you can scroll through the content within the box.  
`auto` - if you don't want vertical and horizontal scroll bars, the browser will only provide them when needed.  

**`float`**  
a float is a box that is shifted to the left or right on the current line. The most interesting characteristic of a float (or "floated" or "floating box") is that content may flow along its side (or be prohibited from doing so by the `clear` property).  
`left`  
`right`  
`none` (default value)  

To float an image with text on its right:  
* float the image left,
* give the IMAGE some margin to create space around it (adding `margin` / `padding` to the paragraph text won't do anything).  

To make the paragraph text align better with the heading above it, give it some width and then float it left also.  
However, the div will then reduce to the height of the heading, because that is the only element that is a block element within that div. To solve this:  

`clear: left;` (/`right`/`both`/`none`)   
`none` is the default value, and it allows floating elements on both sides.  
`left` allows no floating elements on the left side.  

So, add a `<br>` (he used `<br />` in the html for some reason) just before the closing div tag, and set it to `clear: left;` (this works when the floated elements are floated left).  

This causes the div element to expand again. Not sure exactly why though! I think it's because the `clear: left;` means content (ie the left-floated elements) is prohibited from flowing down the left side of the `<br>` element. This forces it to the bottom, after the floated elements. I think...  

If there are left AND right floated elements within the div, use the `clear: both;` value with the `<br>` element.  

Another, more recommended, way to do it is to use the microclearfix hack [http://nicolasgallagher.com/micro-clearfix-hack/](http://nicolasgallagher.com/micro-clearfix-hack/):
```
.cf:before,
.cf:after {
  content: "";
  display: table;
}
.cf:after {
  clear: both;
}
```

Add the above to the CSS and then just add the class `cf` to the containing div.

To prevent a rendering bug ie7 and below add:  
```
.cf {
  *zoom: 1;
}
```

Positioning Properties
---
**`position`**  
    
`static` - a normal box laid-out according to the normal flow of the document. It ignores other positioning properties eg `left: 150px;`

`relative` - similar to static, in that it changes an element without influencing the layout of other elements.  

* It positions an element relative to its position in the document flow 
* Can use the `top` / `right` / `bottom` / `left` offset properties to indicate how far to move the element from where it would have been in the normal document flow; it kind of leaves an invisible box where it used to be.  

eg `left: 150px;` = `150px` from the left.

`absolute` - completely removes the element from the document flow, so it doesn't affect the position of other elements eg  
```
foo {
  position: absolute;
  left: 150px;
  bottom: 75px;
}
```

These values are relative to the viewport, not the edges of the div. This can be solved by giving the parent div a `position: relative;` property and value.

The absolute position of an element will always be relative to the first parent element that has a position other than `static`.

If none of the parent elements in the nesting chain has a positioning property other than `static` the absolute position of an element will be relative to the browser window or viewport.

Absolutely positioned elements can be placed inside of each other. Both must be positioned absolutely.

Maybe have to use pseudo elements for this eg  
```
.classname:after {
  position absolute;
  bottom: 0;
  left: 0;
  width: 50px;
  height: 50px;
  background: #000;
  content: "";
}
```
Can these be generated by nesting a div inside another div in the html?

`position: fixed;` - always relative to the browser window/viewport. Basically stays where it is eg at the top of the page, eg a search box, company logo etc, eg: 
```
.fixed {
  position: fixed;
  top: 0;
  width: 100%;
  height: 60px;
  background-color: #000;
}
```
This creates a thin full-width rectangle at the top of the screen that NEVER moves.
  
**`z-index`** - positions elements on top of each other. You can decide the stacking order. It's like a 3rd dimension i.e. Like the z-axis on a graph. The higher the number, the further to the front it will be. For example, an element with a `z-index` property of value `20`, will be on top of an element with a `z-index` property of value `10`.
  
* `z-index` property can only be applied to elements with a `position` property of value `fixed`, `relative`, or `absolute`.

* You cannot apply positioning AND a float to an element at the same time.

Background properties
---
Any element can have a background colour or image applied.

Background is transparent by default.

Background is everything except the background.
  
**`background-image: url("");`**
Best practice to set a background colour too, that is similar to the colour of the image, as this sits underneath the image layer and will be there if the image goes wrong.  

Background images tile by default.
  
**`Background-repeat: <value>;`** default value is `repeat`.
    
`repeat-x` - repeats only horizontally.  
`repeat-y` - self-explanatory.
    
Images will normally be clipped. So, alternatively, if you want:
    
`space` - images tile and fill the area, without clipping. Browser support is currently poor (July '14), but might be better now.
    
`round` - see latest on this also on w3 to see if browser support is better now.
    
`no-repeat` - prevents tiling. Default position is top-left corner.
  
**`Background-position`**  
first value controls position of the image on the x-axis. Second value is y. If no y value is set, the browser will assume it's `center`. Accepts keywords, length units and percentages.
    
x-axis keywords:  
`center`  
`left`  
`right`  
    
y-axis keywords:  
`center`  
`top`  
`bottom`  

* Can take -ive length units too.
  
**`background-attachment`**  
`scroll` (default)  
`fixed` - keeps the image fixed to the viewport and doesn't scroll with the page.  
`local` - fixed to the element's content. For example, if the content is in its own div, when you're scrolling through the parent div, the content and its background image will go with it normally. But if you scroll within the element, the background image will move with it. Handy. Not supported in Firefox yet (July '14).  
  
**`background`** - short-hand property. Value order must be:  
`background-color` `background-image` `background-repeat` `background-attachment` `background-position`  

Doesn't matter if one or several of the values are left out. For the ones that are left out, the default values will be applied by the browser.

